# Publishing research code FAIR – a roadmap

Nowadays, research results are largely generated by self-developed software or code-based scripts.
This code is regarded as an integral component of the scientist’s independent research.
The FAIR principles (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable) have become widespread in recent years since their definition by [Wilkinson et al. (2016)](https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18), especially in the context of research data and its sustainable use.
The FAIR availability of code, however, lags behind scientific publication and research data publication.

_Making Code FAIR_  
It therefore makes sense to publish code FAIR, especially in the open access area, so that it can be found and reused in the scientific community on the one hand and its authors receive appropriate “credits” when it is reused on the other.

_A roadmap_  
This [document](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14772749) is therefore intended to serve as a kind of roadmap for making FAIR code available.
The measures presented should be seen as current recommendations (as at the beginning of 2025).
Things are changing rapidly in this field, and it is questionable which methods/tools/etc. will become standards in the future and which will not be pursued further due to a lack of support from the community.

_Have we missed something?_  
For feedback, additional suggestions, requests for changes or more information, please contact us at our [helpdesk](mailto:dataservice@fairagro.net).

[Link to the Document (Zenodo)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14772749)
