!!! warning
The Data Act will only come into force in September 2025. Until then 
its provisions are not applicable.

!!! abstract
The Data Act simplifies access to data from IoT devices, either 
through direct access or via a statutory right to an API. However, 
there are certain exemptions. 

The Data Act (EU Regulation 2023/2854) is intended to enable access to 
data gathered by IoT devices from their surroundings. The regulation 
specifically addresses connected products and related services.

Data access can be achieved in two ways: *Access‑by‑Design* or by a 
*data‑access right*, either for users or on their behalf for third 
parties.

# Covered data  

The Data Act only covers certain data types and the associated metadata.

## Data

The Act covers only raw data. Derived data and data obtained 
through “sensor fusion” are excluded because they represent an 
independent value‑added process (e.g. the applied algorithm). 
Likewise, data about “content”, i.e. information that is 
copyright‑protected, is not covered. Note that most [data is not
legally protected](/knowledgebase/legal/rights). 

Data that has been processed is covered as long as the processing does 
not involve a substantial investment by the data holder.

## Metadata

All data‑access rights in the Data Act also capture the metadata 
associated with the data. These are data that describe the content or 
usage of other data (Art. 2 Nr. 2 DA) and are necessary to use or 
interpret the data. They also include information that explains what a 
particular datum or value represents.

# Data access  

## Access‑by‑Design

The Data Act focuses on direct and immediate access to data on the 
device (Art. 3 DA). Only when this is not available do the rights for 
data access apply. 

When purchasing a connected product or a connected service, users must 
be informed about the data the device generates.

## Data Access for users and third parties

If direct access to the device’s data is not possible, the user has a 
statutory right to access the data (Art. 4 § 1 DA). This right is more 
limited than direct access. Data can be refused for three general 
reasons:

* Protection of trade secrets  
* Protection of PII
* Security interests  

However, data access cannot be refused purely for these reasons. For 
example, a refusal based on trade secrets is only allowed if no other 
protective measures (e.g., safeguards by the user) are feasible 
(Art. 4 (6‑8) DA).

Additional circumstances may lead to refusal or restriction of data 
access:

* The data holder is a small or medium‑sized enterprise 
  (Art. 7 (1) DA)
* Data exchange would violate the antitrust prohibition of 
  Art. 101 TFEU, Recital 116 DA
* The data recipient is a gatekeeper as defined by the DMA
  (Art. 5 (3) DA), e.g. Google or Amazon

The user is the entity that either uses or owns the connected product 
or uses the related service. Because connected products focus on 
usage, temporary usage (e.g. rental) is also covered, which is 
reflected in the information obligations in Art. 3 (2) DA that 
explicitly reference rental or leasing.

Under similar conditions, the transfer of data to third parties (e.g., 
research institutions) can be required. This is subject to the same 
restrictions. Additionally, the data holder may demand compensation 
from the third party when data is transferred within a commercial 
relationship between companies (Art. 8 (1) DA).
